P e r f o r m a t i v e s in a R a t i o n a l l y B a s e d S p e e c h Act
Theory*
Philip R. Cohen
Artificial Intelligence Center
and
Center for the Study of Language and Information
SRI International
333 Ravenswood Ave.
Menlo Park, CA 94025
and
Hector J. Levesque$
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Abstract

1

Introduction

There is something special about performative
sentences, sentences such as "I promise to return":
uttering them makes them true. How and when
is this possible? Not all verbs can be uttered in
the first-person present tense and thereby make
the sentence true. In general, the successful verbs
seem to correspond to those naming illocutionary acts, but not to perlocutionary ones such as
"frighten." But, even some illocutionary verbs
cannot be used performatively: e.g., "I lie to you
that I didn't steal your watch" is self-defeating
[12]. So, which verbs can be use performatively,
and in Searle's words [10], "how do performatives
*This paper was made possible by a contract from work?"
ATR International to SRI International, by a gift from
Any theory of illocutionary acts needs to prothe Systems Development Foundation, and by a grant vide a solution to questions such as these. But,
from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research such questions are not merely of theoretical inCouncil of Canada. The views and conclusions con- terest.
Natural language database questiontained in this document axe those of the authors and
answering systems have been known to receive
should not be interpreted as representative of the ofperformative utterances [14], dialogue systems
ficial policies, either expressed or implied, of ATR International, the Systems Development Foundation, or that recognize illocutionary acts (e.g., [6]) will
need to infer the correct illocutionary force to
the Canadian government.
t Fellow of the Canadian Institute for Advanced function properly, dialogue translation systems [5]
will have to cope with markers of illocutionary
Research.

A crucially important adequacy test of any theory of speech acts is its ability to handle performatives. This paper provides a theory of performatives as a test case for our rationally based theory of illocutionary acts. We show why "I request
y o u . . . " is a request, and "I lie to you that p" is
self-defeating. The analysis supports and extends
earlier work of theorists such as Bach and Harnish
[1] and takes issue with recent claims by Searle [10]
that such performative-as-declarative analyses are
doomed to failure.

79

force that function performatively (e.g., sentence
final particles in Japanese), and proposals for
"agent-oriented programming languages" [7, 13],
as well as Winograd and Flores' [15] COORDINATOR system, are based on performative communication. For all these systems, it is important to
understand the semantics and pragmatics of such
communicative acts, especially their intended effects. To do so, one needs a full theory of illocutionary acts, and a formal theory that predicts how utterances can be made true by uttering
them.
The currently accepted theory of performatives
is that they are in fact assertions, hence true or
false, and additionally constitute the performance
of the named illocutionary act, in the same way
as an indirect reading of an illocutionary act is
obtained from the direct illocutionary act. T h a t
is, the named illocutionary act is derived from the
assertion as an indirect speech act. The most compelling defense of this performative-as-assertion
analysis that we are aware is that of Bach and Harnish [1], who address many of the linguistic phenomena discussed by Sadock [9], but who, we believe, have misanalyzed indirect speech acts. However, in a recent paper, Searle [10] forcefully criticizes the performative-as-assertion approach on
the following grounds:
• Assertions commit the speaker to the truth
of what is asserted
• Performative statements are self-referential
• "An essential feature of any illocutionary act
is the intention to perform that act"
Searle claims that accounts based on selfreferential assertions are "doomed to failure" because one cannot show that being committed to
having the intention to be performing the named
illocutionary act entails that one in fact has that
intention. Moreover, he questions that one should
derive the named illocutionary act from an assertion, rather than vice-versa. However, Searle has
imparted into Bach and Harnish's theory his notion of assertions as commitments to the truth
without providing a precise analysis of commitment. W h a t may be doomed to failure is any at-

tempt to base an analysis of performatives on such
a theory of assertions.
This paper provides a formal analysis of performatives that treats them as declarative utterances, not initially as assertions, does not succumb
to Searle's criticisms, and does not require an entirely new class of illocutionary acts (the "declarations") as Searle and Vanderveken [12] have
proposed. The analysis is offered as another adequacy criterion for our theory of illocutionary acts.
T h a t theory, more fully explicated in [3], is based
on an analysis of the individual rational balance
agents maintain among their beliefs, goals, intentions, commitments, and actions [2].
As desiderata for the theory of performatives,
we demonstrate that the analysis meets two properties:
• A sincere utterance of "I request you to open
the door" is both a request and an assertion,
yet neither illocutionary act characterization
is derived from the other.

• "I lie that the door is open" is self-defeating.
Briefly, the ability to capture performatives is
met almost entirely because such utterances are
treated as indicative mood utterances, and because illocutionary acts are defined as attempts.
Since attempts depend on the speaker's beliefs and
goals, and these mental states are introspectable
in our theory if a speaker sincerely says, for example, "I request you to open the door," he must
believe he did the act with the requisite beliefs and
goals. Hence, the utterance is a request.
To meet the desiderata we need first to present,
albeit briefly, the theory of rational interaction,
the treatment of declarative mood utterances, and
then the illocutionary act definitions for requesting and asserting. Finally, we combine the various analyses natural language processor's task by
making explicit the intended word sense of the action, and by reducing the combinatorics inherent
in determining the attachment of the prepositional
phrases.

80

2

Abbreviated
action

theory

of

Below, we give an abbreviated description of the
theory of rational action upon which we erect a
theory of intention. The theory is cast in a modal
logic of belief, goal, action, and time. Further details of this logic can be found in [2].
2.1

def

rational

Syntax

The language we use has the usual connectives of a
first-order language with equality, as well as operators for the propositional attitudes and for talking
about sequences of events: (BEL x p) and (GOAL x
p) say that p follows from x's beliefs or goals (a.k.a
choices) respectively; (AGT x e) says that x is the
only agent for the sequence of events e; el _<as says
that el is an initial subsequence of e2; and finally,
(HAPPENS a) and (DONE a) say that a sequence
of events describable by an action expression a will
happen next or has just happened, respectively.
Versions of HAPPENS and DONE specifying the
agent (x) axe also defined.
An action expression here is built from variables
ranging over sequences of events using the constructs of dynamic logic [4]: a;b is action composition; a[b is nondeterministic choice; a[[b is concurrent occurrence of a and b; p? is a test action; and
finally, a* is repetition. The usual programming
constructs such as IF/THEN actions and WHILE
loops, can easily be formed from these. Because
test actions occur frequently in our analysis, yet
create considerable confusion, read p?;a as "action
a occurring when p holds," and for a;p?, read "action a occurs after which p holds." We use e as
a variable ranging over sequences of events, and a
and b for action expressions.
We adopt the following abbreviations and domain predicates.
(BEFORE a p) de___(DONE
f
p?;a)z

Op = -~<>-=p.
(PRIOR p q) dej Vc (HAPPENS c;q?) D
3a (a < c) A (HAPPENS a;p?).
The proposition p will become true no later than
q.
def

(KNOW x p) = p A (BEL x p).
(IMPERATIVE s) means that sentence s is an imperative.
(DECLARATIVE s) means that sentence s, a string
of words, is a declarative.
(MAIN-VERB s v), (TENSE s tense), (COMPLEMENT s s'), (D-OBJECT s np), (SUBJECT s np),
are all syntactic predicates intended to have the
obvious meanings. 2
(TRUE s e) means that sentence s is true with respect to some event sequence • (which we will say
has just been done.)
(REFERS np x e) means that noun phrase np refers
to thing x with respect to event e.
(FULFILL-CONDS s • e') means that event • fulfills the satisfaction conditions, relative to event
e', that are imposed by sentence s. 3 For example,
ifs is "wash the floor," e would be a floor-washing
event.
2.2

The model we are developing embodies various assumptions constraining beliefs and choices (goals).
First, BEL has a "weak $5" semantics, and GOAL
has a "system K" semantics. 4 Among the remaining assumptions, the following will be used in this
paper. 5
Beliefs i m p l y choice:
(BEL x p) D (GOAL x p).
2Feel free to substitute your favorite syntactic
predicates.
3TRUE REFERS, and FULFILL-CONDS are just
placeholders for semantic theories of truth, reference,
and the meanings of imperatives, respectively. Their
last event arguments would be used only in the interpretation of indexica]s.
4See other work of ours [2] for a full model theory.
5In other words, we only deal with semantic structures where these propositions come out true.

(AFTER a p) def=(HAPPENSa;p?)
def

<~p --

Assumptions

=le (HAPPENSe;p?).

(LATER p) d~f
= ~p A Op.
1This differs from the BEFORE relation described
in [3], which is here labelled PRIOR.

81

This means that agents choose amongst worlds
that are compatible with their beliefs.
Goals are known:
I:::(GOAL x p) - (BEL x (GOAL x p)).
Memory:
p (DONE x (BEL x p)?;e) =

(BEE x (DONE x (BEE x p)?;e)).
T h a t is, agents remember what their beliefs were.
3

Individual
tentions

Commitments

and

In-

To capture one grade of commitment that an agent
might have toward his goals, we define a persistent
goal, P-GOAL, to be one that the agent will not
give up until he thinks certain conditions are satisfied. Specifically, we have
D e f i n i t i o n 1 (P-GOAL x p q) def=

(1) (BEt x -~p) ^
(2) (GOAL x (LATER p)) A
(3) [KNOW x
(PRIOR [(BEL x p)V(BEL x n-~p)v(eEL x "-,q)]
-~[GOAL x (LATER p)])].
T h a t is, the agent x believes p is currently false,
chooses that it be true later, and knows that before
abandoning that choice, he must either believe it
is true, believe it never will be true, or believe q,
an escape clause (used to model subgoals, reasons,
etc.) is false.
Intention is a species of persistent goal. We
analyze two kinds of intentions, those to do actions and those to achieve propositions. Accordingly, we define INTEND1 and INTEND2 to take
action expressions and propositions as arguments,
respectively.
D e f i n i t i o n 2 Intention:
def

(INTEND1 x a q) =
(P-GOAL x [DONE x (BEL x (HAPPENS a))?;a] q).
(INTEND~ x p q) def=
(P-GOAL x
3e[HAPPENS x
(BEE x 3e' (HAPPENS x e';p?))?;e;p?]

q)

Intending to do an action a or achieve a proposition p is a special kind of commitment (i.e., persistent goal) to having done the action a or having
achieved p.¢ However, it is not a simple commitment to having done a or e;p? for that would allow the agent to be committed to doing something
accidentally or unknowingly. Instead, we require
that the agent be committed to arriving at a state
in which he believes he is about to do the intended
action next.
This completes a brief discussion of the foundational theory of intention and commitment. Next,
we proceed to define the more specific concepts
needed for analyzing communicative action.
4

Utterance

Events

We begin the analysis of utterance events by
adopting a Gricean correlation of an utterance's
features (e.g., syntactic mood or sentence-final
particles in Japanese) with the speaker's mental
state, termed a "core attitude" in [3, 8]. Very
roughly, a declarative utterance $ will be correlated with the speaker's believing the uttered sentence is true, and an imperative utterance will
be correlated with the speaker's wanting the addressee to do some action that fulfills the conditions imposed by the sentence. Let us notate these
correlations as:

DECLARATIVE =~ (aLL x (TRUE s e))
IMPERATIVE =~ (GOAL x
0 3 # (DONE y e') A
(FULFILL-CONDS s e' e)
We formalize this notation below.
Someone who thinks he is observing an utterance event will come to believe the speaker is in
the correlated mental state, unless he has other
beliefs to the contrary. For example, if the observer thinks the speaker is lying, he believes that
the speaker does not believe the uttered sentence
is true. But, because he may think the speaker
takes himself to be especially convincing, the observer may still believe that the speaker thinks the
observer is deceived. Hence, he would believe the
6For simplicity, we omit here one condition from
the definition of INTEND2 in [2].

82

speaker thinks that he thinks the speaker believes state as a kind of default axiom (cf. [8]). First, we
p.
specify who is speaking (spkr), who is observing
This type of reasoning can continue to further (obs, which includes the speaker and addressee,
levels. In general, if an utterance is produced but also others), who is being addressed (addr),
when there are no countervailing observer beliefs and what kind of sentence (s) has been spoken
at a certain level of nesting, then the result will (indicated by q~). We shall assume that everyone
be, at the given level of nesting, that the speaker knows that a given utterance is of a given synis taken to be in the correlated mental state [8]. tactic type (e.g., declarative), that speakers and
To be able to state such conditions, we need to addressees are observers, and that observers are
be able to refer easily to what a person x believes known by all to be observing. 7
about what y believes about what x believes etc.,
to arbitrary depths. To do so, we use the notion Definition 6 ~ =~ ~ de_/
of ABEL.
V spkr, obs, addr, e, s, n

Definition 3 (ABEL n x y p) de__f

(BEL x (BEL y (BEL x ...(BEL x p )...)
T h a t is, ABEL characterizes the nth alternating
belief between x and y that p, built up "from outside in," i.e, starting with x's belief that p. On
this basis, one can define unilateral mutual belief
- - what one agent believes is mutually believed - as follows.

Definition 4 ( B M B x y p) def=Vn(ABEL n x y p)

(KNOW obs (DONE spkr e) A
(UTTER spkr addr s e) A (q~ s)) ^
,-,(ABEL nobs spkr
(BEFORE •
,-,(GOAL spkr
[AFTER •
(KNOW addr
(BEFORE • o~))]) )) 2)
(ABEL nobs spkr
(BEFORE •
t~ A (GOAL spkr
[AFTER •
(KNOW addr
(BEFORE • a))]) ))

In other words, ( B M B x y p) is the infiniteconjunction (BEL x p) A (BEL x (BEL y p)) ^... Finally,
we define mutual belief and mutual knowledge as
T h a t is, • =~ ~ is an abbreviation for a quanfollows.
tified implication roughly to the effect that if an
observer obs knows that • was just done, where
Definition 5 ( M B x y p) dej ( B M B x y p) A
• was an uttering to addressee addt of a sentence
(BMB y x p).
s in syntactic mood q~, and obt does not believe
( M K x y p ) de---fpA(MBxyp).
that • was done when the speaker did not want the
addressee to come to know that the core speakerUtterance events can produce effects at any (or attitude a associated with utterances of that type
no) level of alternating belief. For example, the held, then obs believes that the speaker in fact
speaker may not be trying to communicate any- wanted the addressee to know that o~, and so he,
thing to an intended observer. Illocutionary acts the observer, believes that c~ held just prior to
will be defined to require that the speaker intend the utterance. The notation states that at each
to produce BM Bs. In what follows, it is important level of alternating belief for which the antecedent
to keep in mind the distinction between utterance holds, so does the consequent. The symbol '=~'
events and full-blooded communicative acts.
can now be understood as a textual-replacement
"macro" operator.
4.1
Notation for Describing Utterance
Since these correlations are of the form
VnP(n) 2~ Q(n)), they imply VnP(n) D VnQ(n).
Events
We now provide a formal notation for this correlation of utterance form and the speaker's mental

7The case of unseen observers is straightforward,
but omitted here.

83

As we quantify over the positive integers indicating levels of alternative belief, we can derive the
conclusion that under certain circumstances, addr
thinks it is mutually believed (in our notation,
BMB'ed) that the speaker spkr wants addr to know
was true.
Notice that right after the utterance, we are
concerned with what mental state the observer
thinks the speaker chose to bring about in the observer with that utterance. T h a t is, the condition
on utterance events involves the speaker's wanting
to get the observer to know something, Without
this temporal dimension, our performative analysis would fail. The analysis of performatives will
say that after having uttered such a sentence, or
while uttering it, the speaker believes he has just
done or is doing the named illocutionary act. Typically, prior to uttering a performative, the speaker
has not just performed that speech act, and so he
would believe his having just done so is false. So, if
the condition on utterance events in Domain :Axiom 1A involved only what the speaker believed
or wanted to be true prior to the utterance, rather
than after, all performatives would fail to achieve
the observer's coming to believe anything.
We can now state the correlation between utterance form and a speaker's mental state as a
domain axiom.
D o m a i n A x i o m 1 Declaratives and

Imperatives:
A. ~=DECLARATIVE =~ (BEL spkr (TRUE s e))

fined in terms of the speaker's mental states. Attempts involve both types of goal states, GOAL
(merely chosen) and INTEND (chosen with commitment), as noted below.
de]
D e f i n i t i o n 7 {ATTEMPT x e p q tl} =

tI?;[(BEL x -,~p A ,,-q) A
(INTEND1 x tl?;e;p? (GOAL x Oq)) A
(GOAL x Oq)]?; •
T h a t is, an attempt to achieve q via p is a complex
action expression in which x is the agent of event •
at time tl, and prior to e the agent believes p and
q are both false, chooses that q should eventually
be true, and intends, relative to that choice, that •
should produce p. So, q represents some ultimate
goal that may or may not be achieved by the attempt, while p represents what it takes to make
an honest effort.

5.1

Definitions of Request and Assert

To characterize a request or, for that matter, any
illocutionary action, we must decide on the appropriate formulas to substitute for p and q in the definition of an attempt. We constrain illocutionary
acts to be those in which the speaker is committed
to understanding, that is, to achieving a state of
BMB that he is in a certain mental state. Below is
a definition of a speaker's requesting an addressee
to achieve p.

Definition 8 {REQUEST spkr addr • p tl} def=
B. I= IMPERATIVE :=~ (GOAL x
{ATTEMPT spkr •
O3e'(DONE y e') ^
[BMB addr spkr
(FULFILL-CONDS s e' e)
(BEFORE •
(GOAL spkr
Op A
Below, we present our definitions of illocutionary
[AFTER •
acts. Further justification can be found in [3].
(INTEND~ addr p
[(GOAL spkr Op) A
5 I l l o c u t i o n a r y Acts as A t t e m p t s
(HELPFUL addr spkr)] )])]]
Searle [11] points out that an essential condition
3e' (DONE adclr e';p?)
for requesting is that the speaker be attempting to
get the addressee to perform the requested action.
We take this observation one step further and define all illocutionary acts as attempts, hence de-

tl}
T h a t is, event • is a request at time tl if it is
an attempt at that time to get the addressee to

84

achieve some condition p while being committed
to making public that the speaker wanted: first,
that p eventually be achieved; and second, that
the addressed party should intend to achieve it
relative to the speaker's wanting it achieved and
relative to the addressee's being helpfully disposed
towards the speaker.
The illocutionary act of asserting will be defined
as an attempt to make the speaker's believing the
propositional content mutually believed.
def

Definition 9 {ASSERT spkr addr • p tl} =
{ATTEMPT spkr addr •

[BMB addr spkr
(BEFORE e
[GOAL spkr
(AFTER •
[KNOW addr
(BEFORE •
(BEL spkr p))])])]
(BMB acldr spkr (BEFORE e (BEL spkr p)))

exactly as declarative utterances, with the exception that the content of the utterance will make
reference to an utterance event.
6.1

Request

Reports

Let us characterize the truth conditions of the
family of declarative sentences "x requests y to
(imperative sentence sl). " Let s be such a sentence. Let ct be 3el(DONE y el) A (FULFILLCONDS s' ez e). We ignore most syntactic considerations and indexicality for reasons of space.
D o m a i n A x i o m 2 Present tense requests
J= Vx, y, e, tl, (DONE h?;e) ^

(SUBJECT s ~) A (D-OBJECT s y) A
(REFERS z x e) A (REFERS y y e) D
(TRUE s e) - (DONE x {REQUEST x y e ~ t l } )

T h a t is, if event • is happening and the sentence s
is a present tense declarative sentence whose main
verb is "request," whose subject x refers t o perh}
son x, and whose direct object Y refers to person
More precisely, assertions at time tl are defined y, then the sentence is true iff x is requesting the
as attempts in which to make an "honest effort," addressee y to fulfill the conditions of imperative
the speaker is committed to getting the addressee sentence s'. A bare present (or present progresto believe that i t is mutually believed that the sive) tense sentence is true when the event being
speaker wanted prior to the utterance that the described is contemporaneous with the event of
addressee would come to know that the speaker uttering it. s This definition applies equally well
believed p held then. T h a t is, just like a request, to "John requests Mary to ..." as it does when I
an assertion makes public that the speaker wants utter "I request you to ..." For the former, such
the addressee to know what mental state he was sentences are likely to be narrations of ongoing
in. Although he is committed to that, what the events. 9 For the latter, the event that is happenspeaker has chosen to achieve is not merely to ing that makes the utterance true is the speaker's
make public his goal that the addressee know what uttering of the sentence.
By our definition of request, for x to request
mental state he was in, but to make public that
y
to
achieve p, x has to attempt to get y to do
he was in fact in that state of believing p. For
some
action intentionally to fulfill the sentence s',
an INFORM, the speaker would choose to achieve
by
making
that goal mutually believed between
(KNOW addr p).
them. Thus, to say x requested y to do something
is only to say that x had the right beliefs, goals,
6
Performatives
and intentions.
To illustrate how performatives work, we show
SSearle [10] correctly points out that performatives
when both assertions and requests can be derived can be uttered in the passive, and in the first-person
from the utterance of the performative "I request plural.
you to <do act>." The important point to notice
9We are ignoring the habitual reading of bare
here is that we have not had to add to our ma- present tense sentences because we do not have a sechinery; performative utterances will be treated mantics for them.

85

6.2

Performatives

Used as Requests

Next, we treat performative sentences as declaratives. This means that the effects of uttering
them are described by Domain Axiom 1A. We
sketch below a proof of a general theorem regarding performative requests, with s being the
declarative sentence"I request you to(imperative
s e n t e n c e Sl) , and c~ being 3el(DONE addr el) A
(FULFILL-CONDS S1 eI e). We take the uttering
of a sentence to be a unitary utterance event.
T h e o r e m 1 A Performative Request
I=V spkr, addr, e, n, tl,
(MK spkr addr (DONE spkr tl?;e) A

6.3

Performatives

Used as Assertions

We have shown that the speaker of a sincere performative utterance containing an illocutionary
verb has performed the illocutionary act named by
that verb. Under somewhat stronger conditions,
we can also prove that the speaker has made an
assertion. As before, let s be "I request you to
<imperative sentence>."
Theorem

2 Perforrnatives Used as Assertions

I::V spkr, addr, e, n, tl,
(MK spkr addr (DONE spkr tl?;e) A
(UTTER spkr addr • s)) A

(UTTER spkr addr e s)) A
(BEFOREh?;e
(GOALspkr
[AFTERtl?;e

[BEFORE •
(BEL spkr
[AFTER e
Vn~,(ABEL n addr spkr
(KNOW addr
(BEFORE e
[BEFORE tl?;e
~(GOAL spkr
(BEL spkr (TRUE s e))])])) Z)
[AFTER •
(KNOW addr
(DONE {REQUESTspkr addr e a tl})
[BEFORE •
(BEL spkr (TRUE s e))]]
T h a t is, we need to show that if the sentence "I
request you to <imperative sentence>" has just
been uttered at time tl sincerely, i.e., when the
speaker wanted the addressee to know that he believed the sentence was true, then a direct request
has taken place at tl.
Proof sketch: Essentially, one invokes the domain axiom for declaratives at the first level of
ABEL, entailing that the speaker believes that he
believes that he has just done a REQUEST. Then,
one expands the definition of REQUEST into an
ATTEMPT, and then into its parts. The definition of ATTEMPT is based on BEL, GOAL and
INTEND, the first two of which are obviously introspectable. T h a t is, if one believes one has them
one does, and vice-versa. Hence, by the memory
assumption, the speaker actually had them prior
to the utterance. More critically, intending to act
at time tl is also introspectable at time tl because
agents know what they are doing at the next instant and because there is no time to drop their
commitment [2]. Thus, one can repackage these
mental states up into an ATTEMPT and then a

REQUEST.

This default condition says that before the utterance, the speaker believed there would be no
addressee belief after the utterance event (at any
level n) to the effect that prior to that event the
speaker did not want the addressee to come to
know that the speaker believed (TRUE s e). Given
Domain Axiom 1A, and the fact that BEL entails
GOAL, this suffices to entail the definition of assertion. Notice that whereas requesting was derived
in virtue of the content of the utterance, an assertion was derived by default assumptions regarding
lack of belief in the speaker's insincerity.
7

' L i e ' is n o t

a performative

Some illocutionary verbs such as "lie, .... hint, .... insinuate," cannot be achieved performatively. The
following analysis shows a general model for why
such verbs naming covert acts cannot be performatively achieved.
A reasonable definition of lying is the following
complex action:

86

Definition 10 {LIE spkr addr e p} de__f
(BEL spkr ~p)?;{ASSERT spkr addr e p t l }
T h a t is, a lie is an assertion performed when the
speaker believes the propositional content is false.
For "I lie to you that the door is open" to be
a successful performative utterance, it would have
to be true t h a t the utterance is a lie. We would
have to show that the uttering of that declarative
sentence results in a lie's having been done. More
generally, we provide a putative statement of the
truth conditions of "x lies to y that <declarative
sentence s'> ." Call the main sentence s.
D o m a i n A x i o m 3 Supposed Truth Conditions
for Performative Lying
l:: Ve, x, y, tl, (DONE h?:e) A (REFERS x x e) A
(REFERS y y e) D

(TRUE s e) (DONE {LIE x y e (TRUE s' e) t l } )
T h a t is, if s and s' are declarative sentences of
the appropriate syntactic form, x refers to x and
y refers to y, then s is true iff in performing it at
time tl, x was lying that sentence s' is true.
So we can prove the following. Let the sentence
s be "I lie to you that <declarative sentence s ' > . "

GOAl', and INTEND the addressee can conclude
that, before the utterance, the speaker wanted him
not to know that the speaker believes that in uttering S, he was lying. But, this contradicts the
assumption (**). Since the speaker in fact uttered
the sentence, that assumption is false, and the addressee believes the speaker did not in fact want
him to know that he believed the sentence was
true. This renders impossible the intentions to be
achieved in asserting, which are constitutive of lying as well.
Now, assume (**) is false, so the addressee in
fact believes the speaker did not want him to know
that s' was true. Again, this immediately makes
the speaker's intentions in asserting, and hence lying, impossible to achieve. So, in neither case is
the utterance a lie. If the addressee believes the
speaker is a competent speaker of the language,
the speaker must have intended some other interpretation.

8

Conclusion

Requesting works well as a performative verb because requesting requires only that the agent has
made an attempt, and need not have succeeded in
getting the hearer to do the requested action, or
even to form the right beliefs. Some verbs cannot be used performatively, such as "frighten,"
T h e o r e m 3 Lies are not performative
because they require something beyond a mere
~V spkr, addr, e, n
attempt. Hence, such verbs would name action
(MK spkr addr [(DONE spkr tl?;e) A
expressions that required a particular proposition
(UTTER spkr addr • s)]) D
p be true after the utterance event. When the ut,-,(DONE {LIE spkr addr e (TRUE s e) t l } )
terance event does not guarantee such a p, the use
In other words, you cannot perform a lie by saying of the performative verb will not be possible.
On the other hand, certain utterances (perfor"I lie that ..."
Proof Sketch: Assume that it is mutually be- mative or not), when performed by the right peolieved t h a t the speaker has uttered declarative ple in the right circumstances, make certain instisentence s. Now, apply Domain Axiom 1A. By tutional facts hold. So, when a clergyman, judge,
assumption, the first conjuct of the antecddent or ship captain says "I now pronounce you husholds. There are then two cases to consider. First, band and wife," the m a n and woman in question
assume (**) the second conjunct holds (say, at are married. In our framework, there would be a
level n = 1), i.e., the addressee does not believe domain axiom whose antecedent characterizes the
the speaker did not want him to know that he be- circumstances, participants, and nature of the utlieved s' was true. In virtue of the supposed truth terance event, and whose consequent asserts that
conditions on lying, spkr would have to have been an institutional fact is true. The axiom is justified
lying. By expanding its definition, and using the not by the nature of rational action, but by the exm e m o r y and introspectability properties of BEI_, istence of an institution. Such utterances could be

87

made with a performative prefix provided such at[7] J. McCarthy. ELEPHANT: a programming
tempts are made into successes by the institution.
language based on speech acts. Unpublished
ms., Dept. of Computer Science, Stanford
This paper has shown that treating performaUniversity, 1989.
tive utterances as declarative sentences is a viable analysis, in spite of Searle's criticisms. The
[8] C. R. Perrault. An application of default logic
performative use of an illocutionary verb is selfto speech act theory. In P. R. Cohen, J. Morguaranteeing when the named illocutionary act
gan, and M. E. Pollack, editors, Intentions
consists in the speaker's making an attempt to
in Communication. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge,
make public his mental state. In such cases, if
Massachusetts, in press.
the speaker thinks he has done so, then he has.
[9] J. Sadock. Toward a Linguistic Theory of
However, we do not derive the named illocutionSpeech Acts. Academic Press, New York,
ary act from the assertion, nor vice-versa. Instead,
1984.
both derivations may be made from the utterance
event, but the assertive one is in fact harder to
[10] J. Searle. How performatives work. Linguisobtain as it has extra conditions that need to be
tics and Philosophy, 12:535-558, 1989.
satisfied.
[11] J. R. Searle. Speech acts: An essay in the
philosophy of language. Cambridge UniverReferences
sity Press, Cambridge, 1969.
[1] K. Bach and R. Harnish. Linguistic Communication and Speech Acts. M. I. T. Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1979.

[12] J. R. Searle and D. Vanderveken. Foundations of lllocutionary Logic. Cambridge Univ.
Press, New York City, New York, 1985.

[2] P. R. Cohen and H. J. Levesque. Intention
is choice with commitment. Artificial Intelligence, 42(3), 1990.

[13] Y. Shoham. Agent oriented programming.
Unpublished ms., Dept. of Computer Science,
Stanford University, October 1989.

[3] P. R. Cohen and H. J. Levesque. Rational
interaction as the basis for communication. In
P. R. Cohen, J. Morgan, and M. E. Pollack,
editors, Intentions in Communication. M.I.T.
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, in press.
[4] D. Harel.
First-Order Dynamic Logic.
Springer-Verlag, New York City, New York,
1979.

[14] H. Tennant. Evaluation of natural language
processors. Technical Report T-103, Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, November 1980. Ph.
D. Thesis.
[15] T. Winograd and F. Flores. Understanding
Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design. Ablex Publishing Co., Norwood, New Jersey, 1986.

[5] K. Kogure, H. Iida, K. Yoshimoto, H. Maeda,
M. Kume, and S. Kato. A method of analyzing Japanese speech act types. In Second
International Conference on Theoretical and
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation
of Natural Languages, 1986.
[6] D.J. Litman and J. F. Allen. A plan recognition model for subdialogues in conversation.
Technical report, Department of Computer
Science, Univ. of Rochester, Rochester, New
York, November 1984.

88

